Wildfire Vision Statement
=========================

**Author: Javier Franco**

What world problem are you concerned about?
-------------------------------------------

The world problem that I am concerned about is wildfires. Wildfires worldwide
burn between 75 million and 820 million hectares of land per year [2]. Wildfires
destroy structures, animal habitats, timber, and pollute the air by producing
emissions that can negatively affect people’s health [5].

Why is this problem important?
------------------------------

Wildfires are a big problem because they threaten people’s health. Cities that
are 50 to 100 miles within a wildfire regularly had an air quality that is 5 to
15 times worse than the normal amount and 2 to 3 times worse than the worst day
of the year that is not influenced by a wildfire [4]. The smoke produced by
wildfires contains fine particulates that are a major health risk to anyone, but
are more harmful to children, elderly, and people with breathing problems [4].
Inhaling the fine particulates increases the chances of having breathing and
lung issues because the fine particulates infiltrate the lungs [4].

Population growth is causing the borders of a city to expand by creating new
neighborhoods in wildland interface areas which are areas that have large
amounts of fuel and are ideal for supporting a wildfire [3]. People living in
wildland interface areas are at risk of losing their homes and are more likely
to get evacuated if a large fire were to burn towards their location.

What aspect of this problem seems particularly important to you?
----------------------------------------------------------------

I have worked as a wildland firefighter for four years at MQ Franco
Reforestation and an aspect that is important to me is keeping people updated
with fire activity information especially people that are being affected
directly by a fire incident. When fire activity starts to decline people start
to question what resources are doing and some resort to questioning resources in
order to get answers. Resources include hand crews, hotshot crews, engine crews,
task force leaders, division supervisors, and heavy equipment operators just to
name a few. Some reasons why people would question resources include that they
are not familiar with which websites to use and that their local news stations
are not giving them enough information.

Another important aspect to me is informing people about closures and
evacuations. The reason why this is important to me is because some people are
relying on a phone call or police officials to tell them to evacuate their homes
when a forest fire is approaching near their location. The problem with this is
that if there is a malfunction in the 911 notification alert system or police
officials forget to tell residents to evacuate they will be put at risk of
losing their lives. For example three people in Colorado died after a 911 alert
system stopped working and failed to notify them to evacuate ahead of an active
forest fire [1]. In addition, the three people that died contacted Jefferson
County 911 dispatchers, but they were never told to leave their home and they
were not able to receive the automated notification on time to save their lives
[1].

During the fire season I use three websites to keep me informed of all the fire
activity in the U.S which includes Active Fire Maps, National Fire Interagency
Center (NIFC), and InciWeb. I have met people in my crew that are unfamiliar
with these websites and it is important for them to know that they have these
websites at their disposal, so that they can inform themselves about a fire
incident before they get dispatched.

How could a new software system help to solve this aspect of the problem?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

For my software system I am going to incorporate all the aspects that I like
from Active Fire Maps, InciWeb, and NIFC. It will provide users with two options
to view all the fire activity that is in their country which will include a map
option and a table option. Both options will have access to the same detailed
information which includes detailed summaries, statistics, images, articles
related to the incident, evacuations, and closures. People who go to the
software’s website will be able to create an account to receive notifications.
The final part of the software will be for making people aware of the software
existence.

Having a map option will give the user a visual representation of all the fire
activity and they will be able to see where most of the fires are concentrated.
The map version will be similar to Active Fire Maps website by listing all the
fire incidents below the map and numbering them in ascending order which will
help the user with locating an incident on the map. When the user clicks on a
fire incident they will have access to the incidents details, images, maps,
news related to the incident, and a summary of what resources are working on.

The table option will give the user the ability to quickly skim over the
incidents that they are concerned with in a particular area unlike a map. For
example a person who wants to view all the fire incidents in the state of
California will have to click on all the fires in the state which will be time
consuming and comparing information between fires will be difficult. The table
option will have the same setup as the National Interagency Fire Center’s
Incident Management Situation Report by showing the incident’s size, number of
resources, expected date of containment, cost, containment percentage, number of
structures lost, and location. However, the user will have to click on the
incident name to gain access to the same detailed information that is shown in
the map version when the user clicks on an incident.

Having images and a summary of the work that is being done at a large fire
incident will help reassure people that resources are working hard to suppress
the fire and trying to prevent structures from burning. Updating summaries and
posting images for a fire incident will help locals to see on a daily basis what
resources are working on instead of questioning themselves what they are doing.
In addition, giving them access to maps that are given to resources during a
briefing will allow them to see the containment progress by looking at what
parts of the fire have uncontrolled fire line which is indicated by a solid red
line. A briefing a meeting for overhead resources that informs them about fire
behavior, weather, safety, and their assigned tasks for the day.

Users who visit the software’s website will be able to create an account to
receive notifications by entering their personal information. The address that
the user enters will be used for sending notifications if there is a forest fire
incident near the user’s location. The notifications that the user will receive
will be about road closures, evacuations, and poor air quality levels.

In order for the software to be successful people will need to know that it is
available for them to use. The final part of the software will contact news
stations during the fire season and ask them to tell the public that they can
use the software to obtain more information about a fire incident. The software
will gather the email accounts of wildland fire fighters in Facebook by
searching for their occupation and notifying them if they would like to use the
software to keep themselves informed about fire activity in their country. In
addition, it will contact resources that employ wildland fire fighters to tell
their employees about the website when they do classes for training and when
they do their refreshers.

Why do you think that this idea will make a big impact on the world?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

My software idea will make a big impact in the world by keeping people informed
of the fire activity in their country. It will also keep locals near a fire
incident updated on what resources are doing. People who work as wildland
firefighters can use the software to look up an incident that they are being
dispatched to, so that they can have an idea of what they will be working in. In
addition, the software will help save lives by notifying account users of
evacuations instead of having them rely on receiving a phone call or being told
by someone to evacuate.

What Sources did you use in writing this Vision Statement?
----------------------------------------------------------

[1] Colleen Curry, “Colorado Wildfire Deaths Blamed on 911 Malfunction”, abc News, April 4 2012,
http://abcnews.go.com/US/colorado-wildfire-deaths-blamed-911-malfunction/story?id=16072575

[2] Janet Larsen, “Wildfires by Region: Observations and Future Prospects”, Earth Policy
Institute, Nov 2009, http://www.earth-policy.org/images/uploads/graphs_tables/fire.htm [2]

[3] “Lesson: Fire Feelings”, Fire and Aviation Management, http://www.nps.gov/fire/wildland
fire/learning-center/educator-resources/lesson-plans/fire-feelings.cfm

[4] “Report: Wildfires & Air Pollution, A Hidden Hazard”, Climate Central, Oct 25 2013,
http://www.climatecentral.org/news/report-wildfires-and-air-pollution-a-hidden-hazard-16651

[5] “Understanding Fire Effects on the Environment”, U.S Forest Service – Northwest Research
Station, Sep 14 2015, http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/research/fire/fire-effects.shtml

[6] “Wildfires”, National Geographic,
http://environment.nationalgeographic.com/environment/natural-disasters/wildfires/
